okay I think we're live what's up
everybody welcome to this week's edition
of Stellar engineering talks my name is
Colton I'm the community manager here at
the cellar development foundation and I
am NOT an engineer but I will pretend to
be one for the next 30 minutes or so for
the sake of conversation this week I'll
be talking about creating usable Stellar
applications and I also wanted to give a
reminder that this is a series that
we're planning to do on a bi-weekly
basis so every other week we'll have an
engineer from SCF come on and talk about
whatever they're working on sort of
internally at the foundation so before
we get started I want to give a little
background on this talk and why we
thought it might be a good idea to host
it
so lately within the ecosystem team
we've been thinking a lot about how we
want to onboard developers into the
ecosystem whether that's you know
developers who aren't native to the
blockchain space we're developers who
are just thinking about creating
financial applications or whatever and a
lot of them whenever they first start
working with Stellar they don't
completely understand some of the
usability implications or they don't
understand some of the technical aspects
so creating a resource like this as a
sort of way for them to have something
to reference and look back on to
understand what they should be
considering with building cellar
applications is sort of the basis for
this talk so let's see if I can change
slides here yes so basically also before
we get started I wanted to spend some
time defining usable I understand that
usable means many different things to
many different people right we have all
these different applications within the
Stellar ecosystem they all serve
different user bases they all have
different use cases and so usability
kind of means a couple of different
things across different services so
rather than think of this as like a set
in stone definition for what usability
means I'm more of just trying to create
a baseline for understanding what sort
of makes applications usable or how to
give your application a better chance of
being usable within this Stellar
ecosystem so we also need to understand
why Stellar can be hard to use
especially for people who aren't super
into the space right up there
encountering your applique
for the first time what are the some of
the things that they can have trouble
with and some of these things include
going from the real world to the
blockchain right we all remember that
first time like how do I get my hands on
this coin or how do I use a stable coin
also things like public and private keys
are extremely difficult they're not
really something you're used to in your
daily life and there's constant there's
this concept of decentralization right
what does that even mean where is your
app on the spectrum etc there's things
like security so for the first time a
lot of users are responsible for their
own security
maintaining their own private keys
making sure they send their funds to the
right place etc and then you have things
that are Stellar specific like the
seller decentralized exchange anchors
trust lines lumens and so you can take
all this stuff and bundle it up and just
call it hard stuff right so how do we
create applications that abstract away
all this hard stuff and make use cases
I'm easy to understand and easy to use
for you know the average person who's
not into the black gene space
so I mentioned all these hard things
what can we do about it
the first thing is create and use
standards so within the Stellar
ecosystem we have what are called
Stellar ecosystem proposals or steps and
essentially these steps provide a set of
standards for developers to implement
when building Stellar applications and
these are things that evolve over time
with the needs of the ecosystem these
are things that evolve it's new use
cases pop up and these are things that
also evolve as technology improves so
steps are not this thing that's like set
in stone on the protocol level disease
they're these things that are constantly
improving for developers to use and the
way I like to think about steps are just
this category of sort of protocols that
exist on top of the network so
oftentimes and we're describing Stellar
and some of its functionality a lot of
people confuse that for functionality of
the network but really it's just a
standard that we choose to follow to
make that functionality possible so
think about steps is this thing that
exists on top of the network in between
applications and Stellar itself so it is
possible for applications to just
directly interact with the network
without you know implementing any of the
steps but the problem lies and that you
might be able to use the network
but you might not be able to
interoperate with other applications in
the space right like you might not be
able to send a federated addresses you
might not be able to work with anchors
etc so it's really important that if
you're building an application in the
space that you you know mind the mind
the standards try to follow the
standards pay attention to the standards
and try to implement them whenever
you're thinking about ways to build your
application and serve users in the best
way possible oh I went too far so some
examples of what you can sort of do with
SEPs or what problem steps can solve are
things like set to the Federation
protocol so you have a standard where
basically we can map human readable
addresses to Stellar addresses I know a
lot of you probably remember the first
time you sent any significant sum of
money from you know whether it's your
exchange account or your wallet and
you're typing in a public key manually
and you are super scared that you might
have forgot you know your fur you might
have forgot one character or one letter
or whatever and if you mess up you lose
all your money so what better a
federated addresses do is turn these
public keys and to human readable
addresses like on key base where you
have colton star key base do or whatever
this is super easy to send to a friend
super easy to read if you're a user and
basically it just takes the stress away
from you know dealing with public keys
so whenever you're building applications
thinking about okay how can I make the
stress of public and private keys easier
to handle for my users and federated
there are the Federation protocol it's
one way to do that another way is do
something called set 5 which is a way of
just defining how we should derive key
pairs and so one of the things that key
5 are set 5 lays out is this way to
represent secret seas or private Keys as
mnemonic phrases so mnemonic phrases are
basically like just a list of 24 12 to
24 words I believe that basically
represent a private key so if you're
moving from one application to another
you don't have to copy and paste or
write down this super long and secret
key that you might mess up but rather
you can just write down human readable
words and the kind of
go behind this is just I have something
that users can resonate with right like
it's hard to write down the super long
string of characters hope you don't
forget a number and then you're screwed
forever so you want to come up with a
way to make words easy to write down and
easy to digest so that if I mess up like
let's say I misspelled deposit and I'm
trying to move my secret key to some
application to another application I can
figure out that a misspelled deposit but
I can't figure out that I forgot a
character in my secret key that's much
harder so the other thing to mention is
like this is something that's constantly
evolving right and this is like the
benefit of doing things through SEPs
rather than trying to change them at the
the core protocol level so there's also
a step in the works called SEP 30 which
is basically multi-party key management
of Stellar accounts so this is a
protocol that basically defines a way
for an individual to regain access of a
Stellar account if they lose their
private key so in the event that you
lose your private key which is a huge
usability problem not only in the seller
ecosystem but in the blockchain
ecosystem as a whole you can find a way
to recover that key without giving
control of the key to a third party
right because if controlled if a third
party has controlled the key then that
means they can steal your money if they
wanted to hopefully they don't but it's
possible so coming up with different
ways to make you know private keys and
public keys easier to manage for users
is an extremely important thing to think
about when you're building your cellar
applications then next we have standards
for anchors and clients to interoperate
with each other right this problem of
going from the real world to Stellar or
to any other blockchain for that matter
right now the current flow is like you
go to a coin base or you go to buy Nance
or whatever you create an account you
have to buy some coin and then you send
that coin over to your wallet and then
you can maybe transfer it to a different
coin and then send it to your friends
and then you have to go back to coin
base and then try to get it out so
there's this like super convoluted
process of going across different
applications just to achieve a goal and
so we've created standards here in the
Stellar ecosystem that try to solve that
problem such as I accept six at point
four
SEP 26 and so basically this allows you
to go from the real world to your
Stellar wallet without ever needing to
actually leave your Stellar wallet an
example of this is in practice you can
see I think all mobsters soul our
wallets teller X etc all of you support
it but an example on lobster here is
that I want to deposit USD for Maker USD
into my account I just click deposit I
fill out some information I click
continue and boom anchor USDA interface
loads up within my within my wallet I
never have to leave and so the benefit
of this is that you can all of a sudden
Interop interoperate with many sort of
anchor services or on off ramp services
inside of your application without ever
needing to force your users to leave and
so basically we can we can make all of
our services on Stellar interoperate
with multiple services rather than like
having to form a partnership with just
coinbase or form a partnership with just
wire right you can choose a whole bunch
of acres that you want to work with
within your payment service outside of
standards we can also sort of simplify
the experience we can make stuff that's
that's easy to use some of you who might
have been in the space for a long time
might know back in the day maybe the
only way to sort of send or receive
stuff like Bitcoin is through the
command line and of course like no I
don't think payment applications are
going viral through the command line any
time soon so we have to make these
things easy to use right and so first
steps to do stuff like that or what
tools like Stellar laboratory right you
create a wrapper around the entirety of
the functionality of the network and
well to Stellar laboratory is a super
useful tool it's a super powerful tool
it's not something that you would
consider like for mainstream views right
it's not something that you want to give
to users and be like all right cool now
you can send payments or make trades or
whatever so while this is a step in
simplifying the interface it's not quite
there yet right so we have to go a step
further and that's where things like
crypto while it's come in so they take
the the complexity of the network and
they put it in a to easier to understand
wrapper then
say like something like several
laboratory but even still crypto Wallace
can be pretty daunting right the use
case is not immediately obvious for
those who don't appreciate the
complexity of the network or completely
understand what they're trying to get
out of it
so by presenting all of this information
users it can help a little bit but it
might still be complicated for some and
so what can we do about that right like
it seems like we're out of solutions
here but we're not we can actually
continue to simplify until we simplify
it use cases so if you think about where
we started we simplified the interface
for interacting with the network and
then we simplified use cases for
interacting with the network and an
example of this is something like
Satoshi Bay right the only aspect of
seller you're really exposed to when
using Satoshi pays micro payment service
is sending transactions on the network
and then receiving transactions on the
network
they don't expose you to a bunch of
different interfaces they don't expose
you to a bunch of different
functionality it's literally as simple
as deposits and lumens haze pay for some
content nothing crazy
additionally we see this explored
through things like D stock where
instead of focusing on the payments
aspect of Stellar they focus on the
decentralized exchange aspect of Stellar
so now you can decide ok I need to buy
and sell stocks I just need to know the
price and I just need to say how much I
want to buy and sell and boom I can do
it right there in the interface so I
take away all of the complexity of
deciding what I want to do by just
presenting one single use case within
the app and another example of this is
Vega
so Vagos the dollar savings app that
we're working on internally here at SEF
and essentially it just lets you send
and receive different local currencies
as well as exchange in and out of those
local currencies but you're not exposed
to a bunch of order bucks you're not
exposed to a ton of trust science you're
not exposed to a ton of public and
private keys a lot of the stuff is
abstracted away so that your overall
experience using the application is
super easy to understand and so again we
want to expose users to as little as
possible about the network hone in on
one thing that you want your application
to do really really well and just focus
on that it's not really necessary to
support all of the functionality on
Stellar because it can be a lot to
handle its
a lot to handle as a developer it's also
a lot to handle as a user and then the
next thing we can do is educate users so
you want to let users know what they're
getting up front one of the things that
I find a lot of services guilty of
especially in this space is that people
will understand the value proposition
right away that's oftentimes not the
case and so you want to make sure that
you can present that value proposition
to them some examples of this in the
real world are say like key bases
homepage so key base is an extremely
powerful chat application but it's it
can be difficult to use if you don't
know what those value propositions are
and so you have their home page where it
kind of goes through all of the
functionality that's available to you
and why you might want to use that stuff
and then another example on the right is
something like robin hood and what's
interesting about this example is like
if you're downloading robin hood you
probably know what you're getting before
you download it and so essentially I
know what I was gonna get before I
create an account but they still take
the time to educate me anyway so for
example they do these four slides where
they talk about you know you can invest
in socks it's secured you have free
stock trading etc they let you know what
you're getting before you even click
signup or before you even click login
so recreating this flow within your
Stellar applications is just as
important right not everybody
understands Stellar's value proposition
not everybody understands the value
proposition of interoperability and so
making sure that they understand those
up front always good to do an example of
this in the Stellar ecosystem and I
think is one of the better examples is
lobster so before you create a lobster
wallet they actually present you with
these four screens very similar to robin
hood where they tell you exactly what
you're gonna get up front right trading
platform I can manage my assets sick
that's exactly what I want to do so when
I create my account I know exactly the
functionality that I'm looking for and I
know exactly how I'm going to use the
app before I even get started and then
additionally they've spent some extra
time to translate their app into other
currency or other languages rather
so if you're creating an application
that's global in nature which is
absolutely possible on Stellar you want
to make sure that your service can
actually onboard those users right you
want to make sure that it's translated
for the target markets you're going
after you want to make sure that
everybody can interact with your app
that you say should be able to interact
with your app unfortunately our
community is sort of global in nature
and so it makes that process of finding
people to do these translations really
easy right you can pay a handful of
community members to come knock out
translations and next thing you know you
can serve markets all around the world
and easily onboard those users without
any confusion so to wrap this thing up
and keep it kind of short and sweet the
three things we went over is sort of
following standards following and
creating standards this is really
important it's really important that if
you're a developer and you're creating a
use case and there's some standard that
you think can be derived from it that
you participate in conversation and that
you do your best to try to come up with
standards for doing things and then it's
also important that you do your best to
follow these standards they're there for
a reason they'll make your life easier
as not only a developer but it'll make
your life easier as somebody trying to
launch a product that's interoperable
with other products within the seller
ecosystem and you can find these in the
Stellar github repo they're all there
there's about 30 ish of them or
something like that so if you're
building an app on Stellar make sure
you're going through those understanding
them understanding which ones makes
sense for your use case and all that
good stuff
additionally we want to simplify the
experience like I mentioned so simplify
interfaces right remove the stuff that's
not necessary
abstract away the stuff that's really
hard and then hone in on a use case find
out what's you know what are you
actually trying to accomplish with your
application is it a trading application
is it a payments application maybe a
little bit of both what features do you
need to focus on what features do you
need to present to your users and what
features do you need to remove and then
lastly educate users right show them
where the value is show them what
they're getting up front and make their
lives easier whenever they're using your
applications you don't want to just
dump an application with a ton of
functionality on them that they'll never
understand how to use and that's it so
that's pretty much all I had to touch on
throughout this whole presentation I
just wanted to go over some basics of
what to consider when you're getting
started on Stellar what to consider when
you're building applications on Stellar
and how you can sort of scour the
ecosystem to find resources that can
make your applications usable I don't
think there were any questions if there
are any feel free to ask them really
quickly and we can I can try to answer
them but other than that if you have any
further stuff you can't get ahold of me
on key base my username is just Colton
additionally you can find me on medium I
write a weekly newsletter called the dev
digest or basically I cover all of this
kind of stuff so if you're interested in
the latest conversations around
ecosystem standards I cover that if
you're like if you're curious about the
latest developments in the ecosystem I
cover all that stuff so if you're
interested as a developer and keeping up
with the stuff that's going on within
this our ecosystem you can easily do
that just by checking out my medium and
then there's also some base there's
basic stuff such as like introductions
to trust lines introductions to path
payments all that good stuff
so if there's no questions I guess we
can call it a little early thanks
everybody for tuning in and remember to
tune in I think next week we're doing a
set browned table and then the week
after that we'll be doing another
engineering talk so thanks everybody for
coming by
you